---
title: Pictorial depictions of dress
color: "blueviolet"
author: Sabine de Günther
date: 2023-09-11
isPublic: true
lang: en
description: "Two collections form the basis for Restaging Fashion: the vestimentary source collection of the Berlin collector couple Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide and the textile collection of the Germanisches Nationalmuseum in Nuremberg. The latter influenced Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide to make their collection of paintings, miniatures, relief sculptures, graphic art, hand drawings, book art and secondary literature, which they had assembled in the late 19th century, permanent in the Lipperheide Costume Library and to make it available to the public for research purposes and as a sample collection."
cover: "https://uclab.fh-potsdam.de/refa-catalog/files/large/24dfe33d2f4bca218b0ac821ec4135142dc18648.jpg"
---

# The Lipperheide Costume Library (today: Collection Modebild - Lipperheide Costume Library)
The collectors' efforts of the Berlin publishers [Frieda Freifrau von Lipperheide](item/18762) (1840-1896) and [Franz Freiherr von Lipperheide](item/9364) (1838-1906) were rooted in the economic upswing, the development of a bourgeois culture of collecting, as well as in the first flowering of the study of dress in the 19th century. The formal language of clothing, its social symbolism as well as the materiality and technicality of fashion and clothing were considered documents of one's own national cultural practice. The collecting and patronage activities of Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide reflect the aspirations of the liberal bourgeoisie, who promoted the renewal of the arts and crafts through sample collections in museums and provided encyclopedic bodies of knowledge for this purpose.
The after-effects of the World's Fairs in London (1851) and Paris (1855) and the changing practice of arts and crafts due to the Industrial Revolution were decisive for the emergence of the first arts and crafts museums, which developed into educational institutions with collections of samples and models and furthered the arts and crafts movement. At the same time, historical societies were founded with the aim of documenting national and regional cultural-historical phenomena and manifesting an identity-building cultural historiography.
The result of these two phenomena is the creation of the [Sammlung Modebild - Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek](https://www.smb.museum/museen-einrichtungen/kunstbibliothek/sammeln-forschen/ueber-die-sammlungen/sammlung-modebild-lipperheidesche-kostuembibliothek/).

## Collections
Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide acquired a large number of sources that, with their varying source value, placed dress and its historical shape at the centre of their interest. Their collections provide an understanding of dress as a cultural-historical phenomenon that affects all social classes, and their historical position, their emblematic nature and their symbolism.

### The Collection of Paintings
A key objective of the *Restaging Fashion* project was to digitise and make available the 600 paintings that Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide have collected over 30 years with the aim of documenting and preserving the history of dress and fashion. The collection depicts four centuries of dress fashions. All types of garments are depicted, from princely robes to folk costumes.
The paintings collection, which in 1897 consisted of 886 oil paintings, miniatures, wax works and bas-reliefs, now comprises 347 [paintings](item/9660), 231 [miniatures](item/25343) and 28 [relief sculptures](item/9661). The pieces in this collection have different facets. Sometimes their artistic, sometimes their documentary quality prevails, or they shift between these two poles. A large part of the paintings are portraits; these include [portraits of women](item/9725), [portraits of men](item/9726), [portraits of children](item/9727), [family portraits](item/9678) and [group portraits](item/9729). They depict dress fashions, status and symbols in an individual context. A group of [genre paintings](item/9670) function as depictions of social reality and class-specific dress. [Battle paintings](item-set/67420) serve as a source for [uniforms](item/10242). A small number of [medieval panels](item-set/67421) show christian themes.[^The already edited and indexed collection of paintings and miniatures formed the basis for bringing together relevant vestimentary sources. Cf. de Günther 2022]

### The Collection of Textiles
Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide had been collecting with complementary focal points: these included civilian and military textiles - here the [lace collection of Frieda von Lipperheide](https://doi.org/10.11588/diglit.20517) ([example](media/60248)) deserves special mention -, antique objects of daily use, militaria, as well as arts and crafts and artistic works. As a generous donation, they bequeathed the text and image sources they had acquired to the State. Textile items in the collection, as well as a number of paintings and prints remained in their private possession and were not part of the donation. They were sold after the death of Franz von Lipperheide and after the death of his second wife, [Elisabeth von Lipperheide](https://d-nb.info/gnd/133653951) at the auction house Hugo Helbing [1909/1910](item/7802) and [1933](item/6115).

### Prints and Drawings
The publishing couple brought together an outstanding collection of [early modern costume and travel books](set/45213), [genealogical books/album almicorum](item/41434), fashion journals, such as the [Journal der Moden](item/41998), which existed from the late 18th century to the early 19th century and almanacs, but also secondary literature on fashion and dress of all times. At the core of the collection are pictorial representations, including drawings, prints and photographs. At the time of the bequest, the collection of prints and drawings had already grown to 8,000 volumes and 30,000 prints, and even after the bequest and Frieda von Lipperheide's death, Franz von Lipperheide continued to make further transfers. For the project *Restaging Fashion* a selection of 1.000 [drawings](item/25341) and [prints](item/25340) from the Lipperheide collection were digitised and contextualised. The entire collection now contains about 40,000 books and magazines from the 16th century to the present day, as well as paintings, manuscripts and ca. 100,000 drawings, prints and photographs.

### Textual sources
The collectors also brought together a number of contemporary sources on dress regulations. These regulations, also known as sumptuary or moral laws, described the decrees of an authority on the dress of its citizens and called upon the wearers to follow the laws. An example would be the Nuremberg Imperial Police Ordinances (dt. Reichspolizeiordnungen) from 1530/[1531](https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Römischer_Keyserlicher_Maiestat_Ordnung_vnd_Reformation_guter_Pollicey_im_Heyligen_Römischen_Reich), 1548 and 1577. These are a rich source of cultural and dress history, as they described in a differentiated manner which materials and forms the respective social classes were permitted to wear. Class distinction was essentially based on the clothing in which men and women presented themselves. The regulations on dress speak not only of economic aspects but also of the consciousness of the bourgeois and aristocratic world. In Germany, regulated laws on dress came into being with the emergence of towns and cities. In addition to the city dress codes, there were also state dress codes. These state dress codes were influenced by the imperial police codes that had been issued since the 16th century and deviated only slightly from them. Dress regulations quickly recorded changes in fashion and documented them with detailed bans and are therefore an important scriptural source for dress research as well. However, their source value is limited to the descriptive aspects of clothing; the effectiveness of the law is only documented through court cases and court records. Likewise, they do not describe which clothes were actually worn.
