---
title: Textile material culture
date: "2023-09-11"
color: "blue"
author: Sabine de Günther
isPublic: true
lang: en
description: "The often fragile historical textiles provide significant information about worn historical garments; they expand the information from pictorial and written sources to include the materiality of the object itself. Using a combination of 3D-scanning and photogrammetric data capture, navigable 3D-models were created for 15 selected textile ensembles from the Germanisches Nationalmuseum."
cover: "https://uclab.fh-potsdam.de/refa-catalog/files/large/ab30c76382676009f19ed73c92bde7daf303b39f.jpg"
---
# The origins of the Germanisches Nationalmuseum (Nuremberg)
The *Germanisches Museum* in Nuremberg, established in 1852 and named the *[Germanisches Nationalmuseum Nuremberg](https://www.gnm.de/your-museum-in-nuremberg/)* a year later, was built at a time when new museums and pattern collections with samples and designs for artists, craftsmen and scholars were being established. Historic dress ensembles, costumes and textiles were integrated into the collections as an embodiment of national cultural history. From 1867, the *[Kunstgewerbemuseum](https://www.smb.museum/en/museums-institutions/kunstgewerbemuseum/home/)* (Museum of Decorative Arts) with its associated teaching institute in Berlin followed, as did the *[Bayerisches Nationalmuseum](https://d-nb.info/gnd/2005502-X)* (1869), initiated by [Maximilian II.](item/67423) in Munich. In addition, the *Kulturhistorisches Museum für Alltagskultur* as part of the *[Württembergisches Landesmuseum](https://www.landesmuseum-stuttgart.de/en/visit/visitor-information)* (1862) and the *[Kunsthistorisches Museum](https://www.khm.at/en/)* in Vienna (1891) housed collections of samples of dress, fabrics and everyday culture.

The idea behind the creation of the *Germanic National Museum Nuremberg* was the search for the identity of a German nation. The national disillusionment following the failed foundation of a national federal state in 1815 was at the heart of the idea of the Germanisches Nationalmuseum. The liberation wars against Napoleon's supremacy in the years between 1813 and 1815 had not led to the formation of a national federal state, "on the contrary, the establishment of the German Confederation renewed the dualism of two German powers fighting for supremacy, Prussia and Austria" [^Bott 1992, pp. 173-174.]. Efforts to achieve a democratic unification of the empire in 1848 also failed due to the resistance of the sovereigns, who were able to assert themselves against the rising and economically successful bourgeoisie. The bourgeois desire for a national idea and the unity of the German people was realised in the museum and anticipated political reality. The initial idea for a national museum went back to [Baron Hans von und zu Aufseß](item/67424), who had already formulated his desire to establish a central museum for German history and a research institution for German culture in the 1830s. In 1852, he brought together the newly forming historical societies to form an overall association, thereby bundling their interests. The Germanisches Museum was founded as part of this association in August 1852; recognition as a national museum by the German Confederation followed in 1853. King [Maximilian II.](item/67423) subsequently supported these efforts and in 1857 assigned the Karthäuserkloster monastery in the centre of the city as the museum's seat. The nucleus of the collection was formed by von und zu Aufseß' private collection, which he systematically expanded in the museum to include art and historical artefacts. These sources documented the religious and profane realms, arts and crafts as well as the economic and innovative power of the nation.

## The origins of the textiles and jewellery collection
From 1870 onwards, the Germanisches Nationalmuseum's collection, which was still being formed and already comprised 282 original items of dress in 1870, included a series of purchases of garments, including a collection of 17th to 19th century realia, which were presented in a permanent exhibition from the mid-1870s.
The Berlin collectors, von Lipperheide and his wife, were in Nuremberg in November 1878 on one of their acquisition tours. The collectors' years 1878 to 1882 were the years of [high acquisition activity](item-set/67422), during which the presentations of garments, textiles and weapons in the Germanisches Nationalmuseum occurred. This exhibition must have made a strong impact on the collectors.

## Model collection for the acquisition and publication strategy of the von Lipperheide collectors
The fashion and costume scholar [Jakob von Hefner-Alteneck](item/38992), who worked as curator at the *Königliche Vereinigte Kunstsammlungen* in Munich and later as curator of the *Königliches Kupferstich- und Handzeichnungskabinett*, was a prominent and distinct reference point for the von Lipperheide couple. His influence is particularly evident in the observation of the *[Blätter für Kostümkunde](item/17794)* and in the collectors understanding of vestimentary sources [^Cf. in detail de Günther 2020, p. 44ff., https://doi.org/10.18452/24858.].

Von Hefner-Alteneck, who initially worked as a drawing teacher at the Aschaffenburg trade school, began studying material culture early on by copying engravings from the Aschaffenburg castle library. His books also claimed to be truthful depictions and were often based on viewing the originals. He prefaced the illustrations with a historical overview of the history of dress. The descriptions of the images always refer to the object, the image model or the location of the material object, such as a sculpture. Franz von Lipperheide also referred to the models, after which depictions of historic garments were created, made them explicit and claimed the authenticity of the depiction. Hence von Hefner-Alteneck's publications served as a model for Lipperheides publication of the *[Blätter für Kostümkunde](item/17794)*. In 1879, von Hefner-Alteneck published *[Trachten, Kunstwerke und Geräthschaften vom frühen Mittelalter bis Ende des Achtzehnten Jahrhunderts nach gleichzeitigen Originalen](https://www.deutsche-digitale-bibliothek.de/item/OSK6REFMGAJBKMUY4RMRKFLTG3W4V7U7)* in ten volumes. By stating that he only drew "directly from the ancient originals", he once again argued in favour of the authenticity of the illustrations; a claim to scientific accuracy that was later also formulated by Franz von Lipperheide and which was based on von Hefner-Alteneck's methodological approach. Hence the work of the illustrator, engraver, collector, cultural and art historian von Hefner-Alteneck can be read as a template for von Lipperheide's interest in research and collecting.

## Selected historic textiles from the Textiles and Jewelry Collection
The following parameters were decisive in the selection of [15 historic textiles or objects](item-set/45212): the selected objects were to supplement relevant information on the history of fashion that cannot be derived from a two-dimensional painting, a monochrome or colored engraving. The digital 3D models therefor have the purpose to expand the understanding of these cultural artefacts. They can be navigated by the viewer, bring details closer and convey an idea of the volume of the object. 

The light- and pressure-sensitive textiles were mounted on figurines and digitized using a photogrammetric and a 3D scanning approach. The image capturing techniques[^See the detailed process description in the metadata of the individual objects.] were combined as required during data processing. Textiles still pose a challenge for digital 3D reproduction; they are fragile, rich in detail and are often difficult to stabilise (e.g. feathers, lightweight textiles). The considerable effort and the still experimental process resulted in a limitation to 15 textile objects, each with different degrees of difficulty and requiring slightly different approaches.

The [plate armour for the foot tournament](item/19630) is an example from the late 16th century and the [leather hat with coat of arms cartouche](item/25338) dates from around 1600.

Three doublets from the first half of the 17th century are to be mentioned: a [doublet with a slit pattern](item/19078) (c. 1600/1610), another [doublet with slits](item/19898) (c. 1630) and a [doublet with embroidered decorative stripes](item/19905) (c. 1630-1640). 

The [golden bonnet of a Nuremberg patrician](item/19903) (1650-1700) and the [Justaucorps](item/18851) (around 1695) with a  [blue waistcoat](item/18844) (around 1695) belonging to the same ensemble can be dated to the second half of the 17th century.

18th century female fashion is represented by a [one-piece dress in the cut of a waist andrienne](item/19625) (around 1740), while in men's fashion there is the [coat or tailcoat](item/19110) (1790-1795) and the  [white waistcoat](item/18828) (around 1780). The [dress in the "Greek cut"](item/19901) emerged around 1800.

From the first half of the 19th century, a [Spenzer in the old German style](item/18742) (c. 1815) and a [bonnet](item/19618) (c. 1840) were selected.
