---
title: Portrait of the Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg
date: "2024-12-14"
isPublic: true
lang: en
color: "blueviolet"
author: Sabine de Günther
description: "The following artwork allows for multiple interpretations and perspectives: At first sight it depicts three fashionable young ladies and two gentlemen in an idyllic landscape in a temperate zone. Each of the people portrayed has an attribute attached to it, such as a bird or a mirror. These signs refer to the five human senses – taste, smell, sight, hearing and touch – one of the most varied and appealing themes in European painting. At the same time the artwork is also a family portrait of five siblings of a family from the northeast of Baden-Württemberg, formerly the principality of the House of Hohenlohe. Furthermore it depicts the fashion of the time of the 30 years war in Germany."
cover: "https://uclab.fh-potsdam.de/refa-catalog/files/large/3462bf943aaa761056dba91c89a90652c4833aaf.jpg"
---
# Portrait of the Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg as Allegory of the Five Senses
The [small-format painting in landscape format](item/159) shows three women and two men standing in a landscape as an allegory of the five senses. The figures are standing on a narrow grassy hill, in the foreground, the three ladies on the left and two gentlemen on the right. The lady at the left edge of the picture is playing a mandolin. Next to her, facing the first lady, are the other two fashionable women. One holds a mirror in her right hand, the other  lifts her upper garment slightly and is pecked in the finger by a green parrot sitting on her hand. Separated by a narrow path that meanders into the depths parallel to a river, the two gentlemen stand under the tree on the right. While the one, his back turned to the ladies, reaches into the tree for a red fruit with his left hand, the one standing next to him brings a blossom to his face with his right hand.

## Deduction
The reference in the [archive](media/1602) to this painting, originally called *Five Senses*, with anonymous authorship, is to another portrait in the Lipperheide collection under the heading Notes: The painting, originally identified by means of the [archive](media/3777) as a *Junger Mann in einem Schoßwams* by an anonymous artist, shows a young nobleman who bears an optical resemblance to one of the gentlemen from the picture of the *Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg as an Allegory of the Five Senses*. By means of the numbers and letters "1.6.4.7 Henry Fridezic Comte de Holax s [Fridezic alternatively Frideric; Holax alternatively Holar or Holac; free-standing s diagonally crossed out]", which is visible in this [photograph](media/3776), a search could be made for the sitter. The sitter is therefore Heinrich Friedrich zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg (1624-1699)[^Cf. Hohenlohe 1995, pp. 17-24, esp. pp. 22-24]. Derived from other small-format paintings in the possession of the Hohenlohe family, it was thus possible to establish not only the identity of the young man in the [portrait](item/607), but also the identity of the five siblings in the Allergy of the Five Senses. Furthermore, a comparison of the material support of the portrait and the [family portrait](media/1560), here irradiated with ultraviolet light for better visualisation, allowed the conclusion that the two paintings were created by the same artist. It is the court painter [Joachim Georg Creuzfelder](item/9350).  

## Attributes
The present *Picture of the Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg as Allegory of the Five Senses*[^Bildnis der fünf Kinder Graf Philipp Ernsts zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg als Allegorie der Fünf Sinne: Eva Christina, Anna Magdalena, Maria Juliana, Heinrich Friedrich, Joachim Albrecht, ca. 1642-1652] thus shows the five children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg. From left to right are to be seen: [Eva Christina](item/9390) as *[Auditus](item/10613)* (Hearing) with a lute, Anna Magdalena as *[Visus](item/10536)* (Seeing) with a [Mirror](item/10946), Maria Juliana as *[Tactus](item/10586)* (Feeling) with a bird pecking her hand, Joachim Albrecht as *[Gustus](item/10913)* (Tasting) with an apple and Heinrich Friedrich as *Odoratus* (Smelling) with a flower. Thus this is a sibling portrait combined with an allegory of the five senses. This is unique in the oeuvre of the painter Joachim Georg Creuzfelder. In this portrait of siblings, the young Hohenlohe court painter combines the common iconographic sign inventory of the allegory of the Five Senses with a family portrait. Creuzfelder chose a simple assignment of five sense attributes to one portrait each, in which no biographically based assignment pattern can be read.

Another example of this blend of genres is given here: in 1637, at another German court, the sibling portrait of the [Children of Duke Augustus the Younger of Brunswick-Lüneburg](item/43003). The children are shown in an inside room, the open window provides a view of the Braunschweig Burgplatz with the Braunschweig Lion and the so-called "Mosthaus". From left to right are: Rudolf August (1627-1704) as Auditus at the piano, Ferdinand Albrecht (1636-1687) as Tactus with a parrot, Sibylla Ursula (1629-1671) as Visus with a mirror in her hand, Anton Ulrich (1633-1714) as Gustus with the attributes of fruit basket, wine glass and little monkey, and Clara Augusta (1632-1700) as Odoratus, holding flowers in her hand and a dog. In contrast to the Hohenlohe painting, the iconography of the allegorical representation is more complex and more than one attribute accompanies the children.

# Fashionable attributes in the sibling portrait
The [males](media/1628) in the depiction are dressed in a wide-flared, sleeveless leather buff-coat. The breeches are worn wide and are decorated with gold-coloured elements on the side. The wide-legged cup or gauntlet boots fall in soft creases, and spurs are attached to the bootstrap. The toes of the boots are angularly shaped. The ensemble is completed by decorative [braudiers](item/10426) and buckles. The hair falls open and curly over a turn-down collar made of lace. The headgear consists of a felt or woollen hat (beaver fur?) with a high stiff headpiece and a narrow brim. Around the hat is a gold-coloured corded string. 
The [three ladies](media/45744) wear floor-length dresses of richly and fully embroidered textile, moderately puffed by petticoats. The sleeves consist of a half-length sleeve and a long sleeve and fall stiffly. The waists are pushed upwards and the *snip toes* are moderately low. The décolletés are framed by flat, wide [lace collars](item/10427). The sitter's hair is tied in a knot, also called a *chignon*, above the ears and covered by a [small bonnet](item/10421). This hairstyle is accompanied by earrings in the form of single large pearls.

The present painting falls into the transitional period between the early Baroque, also marked by the time of the 30 Years War ([1614-1648](set/48310)), and the High Baroque. Whereas during the Renaissance fashions still varied greatly from region to region, from 1630 onwards an increasingly large part of Europe was covered by a uniform style of hairstyle and dress. The Thirty Years' War separated the two great courtly fashions, the [stiff Spanish fashion](set/48311) from the playful French fashion of the late Baroque under the fashion supremacy of King Louis XIV.

During the 30 Years' War, men's fashion is strongly influenced by military clothing, which in turn was composed of the elements of peasant costume and had been adapted to the needs of the wearer. The basic elements consisted of a felt hat, a soft overskirt, an either [sleeveless or long sleeved leather buff-coat](set/45248) on top of the doublet, the bandelier, a leather strap laid over the shoulder that held the [rapier or sword](item/10290), as well as comfortable breeches and cup boots, also called gauntlet boots. The man's decorative accessories were the hat, lace-trimmed sleeve cuffs, the lace collar and the adornment of the cup boots with lace, as well as the braudier, metal fasteners and buckles and spurs.

At the courts of France and England at the time of the Thirty Years' War, the ideal of the cavalier emerged in the so-called cavalier fashion, which was supposed to be characterised above all by courtly and gallant behaviour. The appearance is characterised by about calf-length, moderately wide-cut tube trousers, which replaced the tight-fitting leg warmers. The breeches were either tied or worn straight, at knee height and at the outer seams the textile was often decorated with metal threads or with nestels, later, at the time of the Rhine count's dress, with [ribbon jewellery](item/353) or rosettes. The legwear was supplemented by wide cup boots, which were sometimes filled out with lace. The front cap was no longer round but angular. 
The long sleeved buff-coat as a military garment had also found its way into the civilian context, its lap parts overlapping and taking up the wearer's movements as he stepped out. [Abraham Bosse](item/48314) illustrates in his engraving [A gentleman, seen from behind, walking towards the right with a cane and wearing a plumed hat](item/25436) the fashionable attributes of a french noblemamn. The broad-brimmed hat was often adorned with an ostrich feather, and the wide cup boots reinforced the wearer's striding out by swinging the textiles. This was acoustically underpinned by the metal accessories such as baudrier and spurs, which had also found their way into the civilian context. Curly hair and a cavalier's beard were further hallmarks of the cavalier. The attributes of cavalier dress were not only adopted, especially by the fashionable bourgeois, but were carried on to fashionable foppery. It was in this context that the term "à la mode cavalier" or ["monsieur à la mode"](set/48313) was first used in Germany and France.

In women's clothing, the hoop skirt has been replaced and the now less extreme widening of the hips is achieved by hip pads and by puffy petticoats. The wide, pleated skirt is usually overlong and gathered as one walks. In the front, a deep, stiffened snood descends into the lap. By bending slightly forward, it accentuated the midriff and the high waistline. 
The sleeves were puffy wide to club-shaped and puffed. After 1640, the sleeves became ¾ length and slightly tighter. The stiffened Spanish ruff was now replaced by a soft, rounded shoulder and a rounded neckline collar falling over the shoulder. The trend towards a softly falling collar can be observed in women's fashion just as in men's fashion around 1630.

In women's fashion, a simple hairstyle replaced the high Spanish women's wigs around 1620. The hair is now tightly tied from the forehead and over the ears with the hair at the nape of the neck to form a strong chignon, an elaborate interweaving in the form of a pinned-up knot. The twisted braids, sometimes supported by netting, sit high on the back of the head and are framed by strings of pearls. This hairstyle is very often accompanied by earrings in the form of single large pearls. Later, around 1640, more freedom was given to fringe and side curls; especially in women's fashion, this harmonised with the soft drape of the dresses. In contrast to the bourgeois women, whose hairstyle required a bonnet, aristocratic ladies were allowed to display their artfully drawn curls openly.
