---
title: Chronology of the Lipperheide paintings collection
color: "red"
author: Sabine de Günther
isPublic: true
lang: en
description: "The genesis of the collection of paintings, its presentation, its evacuation in 1934, its division into East and West and its reunification are summarised here in chronological order. The lack of reception of the collection is not only due to the history of German division. More than 80 years of storage in various depots, interim removals, returns and a lack of resources in the post-war years also resulted in damage and partial loss of the substance of individual paintings, as can be seen from the security patches."
cover: "https://uclab.fh-potsdam.de/refa-catalog/files/large/c70c26ab79548a46066efc31bf517afc08127c66.jpg"
---

# History of the collection
The couple [Franz Freiherr von Lipperheide](item/9364) (1838-1906) and [Frieda Freifrau von Lipperheide](item/18762) (1840-1896), publishers and collectors, made use of the opportunity to make acquisitions while travelling through Europe. Their accession books provide evidence of acquisitions, travel routes and the genesis of their collection. The original documents relating to the acquisitions of the [books](https://storage.smb.museum/erwerbungsbuecher/EB_KBB-B_LIP_LZ_NC_2975-nnnn_2_%5bLZ_1888-1898%5d.pdf), the [copperplate engraving collection](https://storage.smb.museum/erwerbungsbuecher/EB_KBB-B_LIP_KKS_LZ_1880-1897_1.pdf), the [oil paintings](item/6092) and the [miniatures](item/6120) have been preserved.
## The acquisition accounts for paintings and miniatures
The records for their acquisition of paintings and miniatures begin on [31 October 1877](media/17652) and list a total of 668 acquisitions on 22 single-sided pages, mostly listed in chronological order [^minus 65 miniatures, which were crossed out and transferred to the avcquisition record for miniatures].  Arranged in six columns, the first column contains an inventory number[^If a concordance to the surviving paintings and minaitures was established, reference is made to Q7/source No. 7 or Q8/source No. 8.] - although this is usually left blank - followed by the date of purchase, a very brief description, the name of the dealer, the original price, stated in the local currency, and the price paid in Deutschmarks. 
In most cases, the descriptions of the acquired objects are unspecific and summarised, such as "[9 portraits, 1 picture on copper](media/17653)" or "[2 copies from the Museo Rath](media/17671)". More complete designations such as "[Tintoretto, Portrait of General Antonio Leva in full figure](media/17673)" are very rare. In this first form of inventory, however, the author made some mistakes with regard to the content of the paintings, for example in the case of King Frederick V, who is to be referred to as [Christian IV](item/80).
## Händler
The list of the paintings and miniatures includes dealers based in France, Switzerland, Italy, Austria and Germany. Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide collected most extensively in the geographical vicinity of their second residence in Brixen, Austria (http://vocab.getty.edu/page/tgn/7005433). Their dealers in France were Carf & Siegal (Cannes), H. Lagache (Marseille), D. Friedel (Montreux), R. Facini (Nice), I. Stasi (Nice), Pagetti (Nice), Fiz. Conti (Nice), A. Lanne (Paris) and Levy (Strasbourg). In Germany they bought from Munk (Augsburg), Heilbronner (Augsburg), Seitz (Augsburg), S. Levy (Berlin), R. Lepke (Dresden), C.G. Thieme (Dresden), Ada Bergmann (Dresden), F.L. Seifig (Dresden), I.M. Heberle (Cologne), F.F. Jost (Leipzig), B. Helbing (Munich), A. Rupprecht (Munich), I. Drey, jr. (Munich), Steuber (Munich), Thierer (Munich), Gebr. Heilbronner (Munich), Reichl (Munich), Hildebrandt (Munich), Zisihank (?) (Munich), Glissenhof (Munich), Winterhalter (Munich), Bauer (Munich), Fr. Maurer (Munich), Rath Dr Carl Förster (Munich), Böhler (Munich), A. Pickert (Nuremberg) and Neumann (Nuremberg). 
The Swiss dealers were Geist (Basel), Lanitsch (Bern), Müller (Bern), Sagmeister (Bregenz), Picard (Geneva), F. Plan (Merano), I. Strasser (Merano), Poggi (Geneva), Bossard (Lucerne), A. Kündig (Zurich), Schneider & Gubler (Zurich) and Schumacher (Zurich). In Austria they visited Widmann (Hall), Reichler jr. (Hall), Steiner (Innsbruck), L. Ettel (Innsbruck), Reichler (Innsbruck), Alois Reden (Innsbruck), Franz Unterberger (Innsbruck), Jos. Werner (Innsbruck), M. Werner (Innsbruck), Prof. v. Ferdinandeu (Innsbruck), Bürgerspital (Salzburg), Pollack (Salzburg), Ratzendorfer (Vienna), Mr Cubasik (Vienna), Ph. Spira (Vienna), W.M. Steiner (Vienna), Max Blum (Vienna), S. Egger / Comp. (Vienna) and A. Hirschler & Comp. (Vienna). 
 The following dealers are listed for Italy: Zerega (Genoa), Arrigani (Milan), Almanzi (Milan), G. Cazala (Milan), Gaet. Peps (?) (Naples, L. Fusca (Naples), Luizo Emili (Rome), G. Covola (Rome), Fratelli Scaleo (Rome), Ripessa (?) (Rome), Tarazzi (Rome), Piazza Poli (Rome), Giacomini (Rome), Marcini (Rome), Via del Giganti (Rome).
## High-acquisition years
The years 1878 to 1882 were the peak period in which Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide made large-scale purchases on the art and antiques market. In these four years alone, they spent 25,148 marks on pictures, including 24,502 marks for oil paintings and 646 marks for miniatures. The years 1885 and 1886 represent a further high point with a total of 2,674 marks for 36 paintings, as does the year 1891, in which they acquired a further 13 paintings - presumably with a view to the donation - but paid a price of 1,537 marks, which was high in comparison to the earlier years. In the years 1885 to 1886, they paid an average of 74 marks. At the peak of their acquisition activity in the years between 1878 and 1882, they paid an average of 36 marks for an oil painting. In 1891, the average price for an oil painting was 118 marks. The higher sums paid by collectors reflected a competitive art market, also due to wealthy art collectors from abroad.
## The foundation of the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek (Lipperheide costume library)
At the time when the couple decided to donate their extensive collection of textual and pictorial sources to the state, they could look back not only on a publishing career but also on three decades of collecting. 
On 7 March 1890, the following letter was sent to Emperor Wilhelm II:
> Your Excellency!
> I, the undersigned, hereby take the liberty of respectfully submitting the following information to Your Excellency. I am the owner of a costume collection which currently contains the following items:
> 675 oil and other paintings; 115 miniatures together with portraits in wax etc., 1250 sheets of drawings; 14,918 sheets of engravings etc.; 1378 photographs; books: 2997 works with 4428 volumes; 101 calendars and almanacs with 569 volumes; 144 fashion magazines with 1551 volumes; 59 costume figures. See the [full letter here](item/6111).

Their donation stipulated that the collection be made a permanent part of the Kunstgewerbemuseum Berlin as a publicly accessible reference library, which was realised in 1905 with the opening of the [Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek in Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7](set/48551). At the initiative of Peter Jessen, the director of the library, and in accordance with a decree of the Ministry of Culture[^27 May 1924.], the library was re-named Staatliche Kunstbibliothek (State Art Library) in 1924 with the explanatory addition "formerly the library of the Kunstgewerbemuseum" (Museum of Decorative Arts). The library was subsequently separated from the Kunstgewerbemuseum  and is still part of the Kunstbibliothek Berlin today.
## The paintings collection and its presentation
The first public exhibition of the collection dates back to autumn 1896, when Franz von Lipperheide made the holdings, which were intended as a donation, accessible to the public in the Berlin residential and publishing house at Potsdamer Straße 38 (now Potsdamer Straße 96). 
Two years after the first presentation of the collection, it was donated to the Prussian state in 1898 and transferred to the Kunstgewerbemuseum  with its associated library. Before it was installed there, an interim solution was found at Flottwellstraße 4 and opened to the public on weekdays from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and on Tuesday and Friday afternoons from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.[^Cf. Jessen 1900a, Column XVI.].
In March 1900, the courtyard of the Kunstgewerbemuseum  was converted into a showroom for the prints from the Lipperheide donation. The prints were presented on display walls and the tomes in showcases.
The establishment of a dedicated [room for the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek](set/48551) in the annexe building next to the Martin-Gropius-Bau, which opened in autumn 1905, marked a turning point, as a permanent arrangement was established here for the first time. The large ["hall of the Lipperheide Reading Room"](item/17693) was reserved solely for the collection of vestimentary sources and was divided into six sections equipped with [reading tables, electric lighting and bookcases](item/18718).
Around 300 oil paintings were arranged above the bookcases and on the [walls](item/18720). They adorned the walls of the study room in the style of a St Petersburg hanging. The miniatures, on the other hand, were integrated into the collection cabinets on green plafonds, as the preserved [example](item/650) still shows. Paintings were also distributed throughout the hall, the foyer and the adjoining rooms; some pictures were considered reserve pictures and were kept in library rooms. Strategies of semantisation, knowledge ordering or specific educational objectives are not discernible in this arrangement.

# Chronology 1867-today 
## Genesis, presentation and storage of the paintings and miniatures
### **1867: The Deutsche Gewerbe-Museum zu Berlin**
The *Deutsche Gewerbe-Museum zu Berlin* (German Crafts Museum in Berlin) was founded on **5 August 1867** on the initiative of the association of the same name. Exhibits from the Paris World Exhibition were purchased for the museum in the same year it was founded. The first collection rooms were opened on 17 April 1868 at the interim location in Georgenstraße/Stallstraße, today's Universitätsstraße, in the former *Gropius'schen Diorama*. The *school* associated with the museum opened on 12 January 1868** with 230 pupils.
**1872** marked a turning point for the *German Crafts Museum*: under the patronage of the Crown Prince and his wife, an exhibition of arts and crafts artefacts from the collection and from royal and bourgeois lenders was shown at a high-profile venue, the Berlin Zeughaus. The former exhibition assistant **[Julius Lessing](item/18818)** was appointed director of the *German Crafts Museum*. Financial support from the government made it possible to erect a new building and thus create a permanent home for the museum. Martin Gropius and Theodor Schmieden were responsible for planning the building, the foundations were laid in 1877 and on 21 September 1881** the museum, which had been run as the *Kunstgewerbemuseum* (Museum of Arts and Crafts) since 1879, was ready to move into its new premises in the Martin-Gropius-Bau in today's Niederkirchner Straße. The architecture united the school, the library and the applied arts collections.
**1872** marked a turning point for the *German Crafts Museum*: under the patronage of the Crown Prince and his wife, an exhibition of arts and crafts artefacts from the collection and from royal and bourgeois lenders was shown at a high-profile venue, the Berlin Zeughaus. The former exhibition assistant **[Julius Lessing](item/18818)** was appointed director of the *German Crafts Museum*. Financial support from the government made it possible to erect a new building and thus create a permanent home for the museum. Martin Gropius and Theodor Schmieden were responsible for planning the building, the foundations were laid in 1877 and on **21 September 1881** the museum, which had been run as the *Kunstgewerbemuseum* since 1879, was ready to move into its new premises in the Martin-Gropius-Bau in today's Niederkirchner Straße. The architecture united the school, the library and the applied arts collections.
### 1890–1892: Negotiations
In a letter dated **7 March 1890** to Emperor Wilhelm II, Franz von Lipperheide formulated his intention to give to the state "675 oils and other paintings; 115 miniatures together with portraits in wax etc". Since the beginning of that year, he had been negotiating with the royal family about the modalities of donating his collection. The last record in his travel expense book for this collection is dated 22 June 1892; for the same year, the Imperial Ministry of Finance accepted the donation of Lipperheide's costume library and paintings collection by legal act. The deed of donation was signed by Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide on **19 March 1892**.
### 1896–1906: Temporary presentation
An initial interim presentation of the future donations could be viewed and used from *autumn 1896* in the couple's residential and publishing house at Potsdamer Straße 38 (today Potsdamer Straße 96).
The obligation associated with the donation to make the holdings accessible to the public prompted the *Kunstgewerbemuseum* to rent premises for the costume library at Flottwellstraße 4. The book and print collection could be viewed there from **1 October 1899**, while the paintings remained in the publishing house.
### Berlin Art Exhibition
In 1901, Emil Doepler's [Portrait of a woman in a dark dress and feathered hat](item/618) from the Lipperheide collection of donations was shown at the *Grosse Berliner Kunstausstellung*, which had been held annually since 1893[^Grosse Berliner Kunstausstellung vom 4. Mai bis 29. September im Landes-Ausstell-Gebäude am Lehrter Bahnhof, Grosse Berliner Kunstausstellung 1901, p. 15, no. 242; ill. p. 152. Online: http://www.digishelf.de/objekt/71859374X-1901/27/.].
### 1905–1934: Installation in the annexe to the Kunstgewerbemuseum 
The donation was linked to the permanent presentation of the collection, for which the *Kunstgewerbemuseum * was to provide space. The *Martin-Gropius-Bau* did not provide sufficient room for either the museum's own constantly growing library or the additional *Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek*. The decision was therefore taken to commission an adjoining extension, which was planned and executed by the architect *Oskar Hossfeld (1848-1915)*. In **autumn 1905**, the libraries of the *Kunstgewerbemuseum * and the *Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek* were moved into the [rooms](set/48551) in the completed [extension](media/48639). The director of the library was *[Peter Jessen](item/18769)*; the architect *Bruno Paul* was appointed director of the *Unterrichtsanstalt* in 1906.[^The staffing at the opening was as follows: For the library: director: Dr Jessen; assistant directors: Professor Dr Loubier, Dr. Doege (costume library); secretary: Rupp; administrators: Ziethen, Kluge, Wieynk, Wiedemann; material collection: Falkenberg. For the school: Director (acting): Prof Mohn (Director of the Royal Art School); Assistant Director: Fendler.].
### 1909/1910: Bequests of Franz and Frieda von Lipperheide
The donation from 1892 was only part of a larger collection that the couple had kept in their possession. Frieda von Lipperheide had already died in **1896**. After Franz von Lipperheide's death in **1906**, four auctions were organised from the remaining collection at the auction house [Hugo Helbing](item/18765) in Munich in the years **1909 and 1910**: [oil paintings, textiles, weapons and bronzes](item/7802).
### 1916: Fashion exhibition
In 1915, fashion journalist Julie Elias and Ernst Friedmann, architect and owner of the Hohenzollern arts and crafts house Friedmann & Weber, attempted to establish a *Berlin Fashion Museum* (Berliner Moden-Museum) and founded the *Fashion Museum Association Berlin* (Verein Moden-Museum e.V. Berlin) for this purpose in the same year. To promote their idea, they organised a *fashion exhibition* in Ermelerhaus at Breite Strasse 11 in **November 1916**[^Heinrich Doege: Führer durch die Ausstellung 200 Jahre Kleiderkunst 1700-1900 im Ermelerhaus, Breite Strasse Nr. 11. Nov. 1916 - Januar 1917, Berlin, 1916.].
### 1916 onwards: Use of the reading room as a military hospital during the First World War
The library premises were converted into a military hospital during the **First World War**. On 3 January 1919, library director Peter Jessen and Privy Councillor Otto von Falke, Director of the Kunstgewerbemuseum , sent a [notification](item/18767) to the General Administration of the Royal Museums requesting that funds be made available for the restoration of the library.
### 1921: Separation of premises
At the end of 1920, the museum objects of the *Kunstgewerbemuseum * were transferred to the Berlin City Palace and the unity of the library, *Kunstgewerbemuseum* and *Unterichtsanstalt* (Teaching Institute) was dissolved. The *Unterrichtsanstalt* also left its location at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7a in 1924/25. Only the Kunstgewerbemuseum library remained in the northern wing of the extension building[^For cost reasons,the school merged with the Academic College of Fine Arts under the new name United State Schools of Fine and Applied Arts/Vereinigte Staatsschulen für freie und angewandte Kunst.].
### 1924: Renaming
At the instigation of Peter Jessen and in accordance with the decree of the Ministry of Culture of **27 May 1924**, the library was renamed the *Staatliche Kunstbibliothek* with the explanatory addition "formerly the Library of the Kunstgewerbemuseum ".
### 1933: Bequest of Elisabeth von Lipperheide
The bequest of Elisabeth von Lipperheide, the second wife of Franz von Lipperheide, was also administered by [Hugo Helbing](item/18765) and auctioned off in the [1933 auction](https://doi.org/10.11588/diglit.5761).
### 1934: Occupation of the building by the Gestapo
The *Geheime Staatspolizeiamt (Gestapo)* claimed the annex at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7a as its [headquarters](media/48641) in **1934**. Hermann Schmitz](item/18817)*, who had been appointed director of the Kunstbibliothek in 1933, had already adapted his acquisition policy and public relations work to the demands of the Nazi regime. Under the pretext of state defence and state security in the course of the Roehm coup, the eviction of the library building was enforced in July 1934. The [relocation](media/48643) to the Martin-Gropius-Bau took place in the night of **3 to 4 July 1934** and was completed in the morning. The book and print collections as well as the Lipperheide [painting collection](media/48642) were relocated to the atrium of the Martin-Gropius-Bau. 
### Security measures at the beginning of the war
As early as **1934**, the museum and library directors were asked to draw up priority lists for their holdings, organised according to two value groups, and to record the items to be salvaged in the event of an air raid. The list compiled by *[Carl Koch](item/18788)* mentions no paintings from the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek, but 854 sources of texts on traditional costumes and ceremonies in the first value group and a further 668 volumes in the second category;[^These were: "Lipp 845 vols. (general costume works up to the 18th century, criers, China, Japan, carving books, bite books, festivities)" and "Lipp 668 vols. (genealogical books, France 16th-18th century), caricatures". In: SMB-ZA, Goldmann 4.1.2, KB, p. 1. History of the relocation of the holdings of the former Staatl. Kunstbibliothek and the former Zentralbibliothek, Berlin.] a group which, however, he removed from the priority list after a request to reduce its size. As the Lipperheide paintings, with one exception, are not noted in the evacuation, salvage or restitution files, it can be assumed that they remained in Berlin during the war - with a few exceptions - or had already been relocated to the Museum Island by this time.
From a letter from the painting restorer *[Dr Johann Hell](item/18820)* dated **27 September 1935** it can be seen that the condition of the Lipperheide paintings had been examined. The indication that these paintings had to be immediately and carefully transferred to the workshop of the assistant restorer Teichler at the *[Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum](item/18781)*, today's *Bode-Museum*, suggests that the paintings were already stored on the Museum Island in 1935.  In a [reply letter dated 2 October 1935](item/18816), signed by *[Hermann Schmitz](item/18817)*, the library director thanks the restorer Johann Hell and commissions the proposed measures. As early as October 8 of the same year, assistant restorer Teichler confirms the [receipt of the oil paintings to be restored](item/18824): "Four altarpieces with Saints Andrew, John etc.; gilded wood carving on the front, painted on the back (Passion scenes etc.)" and "An oil painting, Brueghel school (peasant dance)."
### Library use during the Second World War
From **January 1936**, the *Kunstbibliothek* and with it the *Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek* were once again open on weekdays from 09:00 to 21:00 and made their collections available in the atrium of the Martin-Gropius-Bau. However, due to bomb damage and fighting during the capture of Berlin, it was impossible to continue operating the library as of **May 1944**.
### 1939ff: Removals and relocations during the Second World War
Directly at the beginning of the Second World War on **1 September 1939**, the museums closed to the public. The preventive and rescue measures for around 40 museums in Berlin were resumed in 1939, under the responsibility of the directors of the individual museums. From **September 1939**, outstanding holdings of the Kunstbibliothek were packed into 160 crates and secured in the basement of the neighbouring Martin-Gropius-Bau. At the beginning of 1940, the holdings of the Kupferstichkabinett (Museum of Prints and Drawings), the Kunstgewerbemuseum  (in the City Palace), the Kunstbibliothek and the Zeughaus were moved to the new Coin Office. The Lipperheide painting collection was left out, as it was not categorised as part of the so-called high-quality holdings. 
**In 1941**, the atrium of the Kunstgewerbemuseum  was also cleared of the holdings of the Art and Costume Library. On 19 November 1942, the Kunstbibliothek reported that a quarter of Lipperheide's book collection and some of the other books had been salvaged[^Cf. de Günther 2020, p. 191.] No document has survived of the salvage of Lipperheide's painting collection outside Berlin. It is difficult to reconstruct the exact locations of individual objects in the collection during the war years[^Klaus Goldmann, who together with Beate Wild researched the salvage and repatriation history of the museums in 1986 and 1987, locates the Lipperheide paintings in three different storage locations in his overview. Some of the paintings were taken to the Pergamonmuseum, but this was not specified, while other paintings remained in the basement of the Martin-Gropius-Bau at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7. He locates the miniatures at a site which he describes with the abbreviation "SPf", but which he does not resolve.]. After the division of Germany, the paintings remained in the East on the Museum Island. There, Lipperheide's paintings were stored on shelves numbered from 1 to 15 and reaching up to the ceiling. As can be seen from various [location lists of the time](set/48645), the smaller paintings were stored in baskets.
A letter by Paul Ortwin Rave from **January 1960**, which describes the measures taken to return the miniatures from the University of Tübingen's depot, provides information on the whereabouts of the miniatures. The artworks had arrived in the university city via various salvage centres in Baden-Württemberg[^Rave names 142 miniatures, packed in groups in cardboard boxes, as well as 20 miniatures or paintings remaining in the Kunstbibliothek. He puts the number of paintings on the Museum Island at 352, based on a photo file available to him. Klaus Goldmann identified the return lists of the works removed from Tübingen. He assigned the boxes numbered 43/298 to 43/341 to the Kunstbibliothek and the State Library. Boxes 43/378 to 43/383 contained the Lipperheide miniatures. The first digit of the numbering indicates the year of salvage.].
### 1944: Closure of the library
The bombing raids of **November 1943** damaged the museums in Prinz-Albrecht-Straße, i.e. the Ethnological Museum and the former Kunstgewerbemuseum . In **March 1944**, *[Wolfgang Bruhn](item/18791)* reported [four paintings damaged during an air raid](item/18815) from the Lipperheide Collection. The severe damage to the building meant that the reading rooms at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7 had to be closed in May 1944.
### 1945–1949: Storage damages
In **May 1949**, over 300 paintings from the Lipperheide collection were relocated to the former [crate room of the Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum](item/18812). The most serious damage to the Museum Island, and thus also to the *[Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum](item/18781)*, was caused by the attack on the 5th of February 1945. 
This may have had an influence on the condition of the Lipperheide paintings, which were stored in the [depots](item/18812)[^The reclaim letters permit such an indirect conclusion. There are no files on the transfer of the paintings to the Museum Island. The first post-war cleaning of the collection of paintings on the Museum Island is documented for November 1945.]. Bomb damages and artillery hits on the *[Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum](item/18781)* caused downpours of rain to reach the ground floor and cellars. The water damage [visible on the Lipperheide paintings](set/48646) may have been caused by this. There is also evidence of a flood in the spring of 1946.
### 1945: Division among the Allies after the end of the war
Berlin surrendered on **2 May 1945**. The comprehensive occupation[^On 4 April, the village of Merkers (Röhn) with the nearby Kaiseroda mine, the Hattorf mine and the Ransbach shaft had already been occupied by the Americans. Eight days later, on 12 April 1945, the American army also occupied the area not far from the Grasleben salt mine near Helmstedt and the Schönebeck salt mine on the Elbe near Magdeburg.]. Germany's occupation by the Allies naturally led to property difficulties and loss of control over the storage sites after the end of the war.[^In the course of the fighting, the museums in Prinz-Albrecht-Straße and Saarlandstraße (Stresemannstraße) were occupied by Russian troops on 1 May 1945 and on the following day (the surrender) also the Museum Island, i.e. the Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum, Pergamon, Neues Museum, Altes Museum and the Nationalgalerie.] As the city was divided into four sectors, the museum buildings came under American, Soviet and British administration.
From **7 May 1945 onwards**, deportations took place, including those of holdings from Prinz-Albrecht-Straße. They lasted until the first week of June, stopped briefly and began again in December 1945. The *Kunstbibliothek* was not affected by the removals, but the cellars and storerooms of the Museum Island were. No report on this has survived. In the further course of events, the museum buildings were divided up to the Western powers, in this case the American troops]. After the end of the war, problems of competence and ownership dominated in the museums, as well as storage problems resulting from the destroyed museum buildings. 
Cultural property seized by the British, French and American Allies was transferred to the British "Depository" in Celle, the French site in Tübingen and the American *Central Collecting Point* in Marburg and Wiesbaden respectively, before being handed over to a German trustee administration in 1949.
### 1949 onwards: Berlin, the divided city and twin museums
As a result of the division of Germany, the collections of the Berlin museums were also divided. The Prussian collections remaining in the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin were transferred **1957** to the newly founded *[Stiftung Preußischer Kulturbesitz](item/7261)*, thus opening the way for works to be returned to Berlin. For the divided city of Berlin, with its unclear administrative and security situation, the repatriation of the collection holdings, especially to the West Berlin part, was difficult to resolve. The collections in the East part of Berlin or, for example, the paintings from the painting gallery transferred to Wroclaw and Gdansk had initially been confiscated under Soviet occupation and then taken elsewhere. Restitution to the museums of the GDR, or more precisely the "handover of 1.5 million works of art" by the USSR, took place in 1958 and 1959, after which the restitution was considered complete. One last major restitution, which was kept secret, took place between 1977 and 1978.
In the summer of 1945, the holdings of the Kunstbibliothek initially remained in their temporary home, the Martin-Gropius-Bau, where the reading room was also set up].
### 1945/46: Central Collecting Point
The US military government's art collecting centre was set up as a *Central Collecting Point* in Marburg two weeks after Germany's surrender in order to secure highly endangered paintings from the Haina mine near Siegen. The works of art were to be gathered and catalogued in an effort to protect them so that they could later be returned to their rightful owners. The Marburg collection centre only existed between May 1945 and August 1946 and was replaced by the Central Collecting Point in Wiesbaden after its dissolution.
At least two works from the Lipperheide painting collection were transferred to Marburg and were administered at the *Central Collecting Point*. This applies to the painting *[Flight to Egypt](item/546)*, a painting [photographically recorded there](https://www.bildindex.de/media/obj00001531/fm191510) in 1946. The same applies to the *[Portrait of Tobias Jobst](item/128)* by Hans Plattner, also [photographically documented](https://www.bildindex.de/media/obj02558064/gg3200_052).
### 1946–1958: The art storage centre at Celle Castle 
After the war ended, work also began on securing works of art from the Schönebeck and Magdeburg salt mines and transferring them to the British-administered *Kunstgutlager Schloss Celle*. These included extensive holdings of the Kunstbibliothek, which had been stored at Celle Castle since the spring of 1946, but were limited to prints and books.
### 1949 onwards: Safekeeping and preservation of the Lipperheide paintings 
At an unknown date after the removal from the extension building at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7a **in 1934 and before 25 March 1949**, the Lipperheide collection items were moved to the basement of the former *German Museum* together with the holdings of the Kunstbibliothek. Here, the library director of the Kunstbibliothek (West)*[Carl Koch](item/18788)* estimates 42 pictures from the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek in the Egyptian department and around 310 pictures in a basement room of the *German Museum*. This is documented by a [letter from Carl Koch](item/7811) to Ludwig Justi, Director General of the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin (East).
A series of [notes, letters and activity reports](set/48647) on these and other object movements on the Museum Island, especially the Pergamon Museum, have survived. With a request for careful storage and preservation, especially of the Lipperheide paintings, Koch wrote to Justi: ["These are objects that were relocated to the deep basement rooms during the war and are now scattered around."](item/7811). This was preceded by a [short letter dated 27 July 1948 from Rudolf Anthes](item/18795), an employee of the Egyptian Department, to Carl Koch with a request to store the collection objects and the furniture of the Kunstbibliothek elsewhere in order to free up space for the Egyptian Department. **In 1950**, the Lipperheide collection of paintings, consisting of 316 paintings, became part of the collection of the Gemäldegalerie. It was only capable of exercising a purely custodial function, but the reports for 1949 and 1950 speak of ongoing safeguarding measures[^For the period from 15 November 1949 to 15 January 1950, as well as for the following reporting periods up to 14 September 1950, ongoing safeguarding measures are documented. Ongoing conservation measures are documented, such as the cleaning and restoration by the restorer Hans Böhm and the carpenter Hentschel for the frames, as well as renewed inspections in February and March 1950. In June and July 1950, photographic recording of the Lipperheide painting collection began. According to the work report, the cleaning of the works and photographic recording continued until mid-September 1950. At the same time, a picture card index was created and the 315 paintings were given new inventory numbers.].
In **August 1951**, around 315 paintings from the Lipperheide collection were transferred from the wood restoration studio of Mr Schrön's sculpture collection to the [Teichler workshop](item/18794) of the Gemäldegalerie.
In the course of repatriating the cultural assets confiscated by the Russian armed forces to the Gemäldegalerie (East) and examining the possibilities for accommodating these holdings, curator Irene Geismeier recalled that a room on the upper floor of the Bodemuseum was converted into a storeroom and furnished to house the canvas paintings from the Gemäldegalerie collection. At the same time, Geismeier mentions the paintings owned by Franz von Lipperheide, thus proving that 315 paintings were located on the Museum Island:
> A special small depot is also planned for the paintings from the Lipperheide costume collection, which are currently still inadequately housed in the large wood workshop. A number of paintings that have returned from the Soviet Union and whose owners could not be identified have been stored in a cellar of the Pergamonmuseum. These are mainly portraits of princely personalities and portraits of officers[^Irene Geismeier: Gemäldegalerie Forschungen und Berichte (1)1957-(31)1991, 3/4 (1961), p. 163.].

### 1947/1953: Opening of the Kunstbibliothek in Berlin (West)
By the end of **1945**, the Kunstbibliothek had been reopened in the purpose-built library building at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 7a. *Albert Boeckler](item/18789)*, library director from 1942 to 1947, set up a temporary reading room in the basement. After a brief interim solution at the new location in the western part of the city, in the northern pavilion of the Dahlem museum building at Arnimallee 23, arranged by *[Carl Koch](item/18788), the Kunstbibliothek moved its holdings again in **October 1953**, now to the Landwehrkasinos at Jebensstraße 2 in the Charlottenburg district, and opened on 20 January 1954. The Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek occupied the reading room on the ground floor. With the return of the former cabinet fittings from the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek to the Jebensstraße location, the miniatures were once again stored on green plafonds in the cabinet doors as before. A few paintings were hung in the study room.
Following an extensive petition, the Berlin book and print collections were also transported back from Celle Castle in **July 1956**.  
### C. 1975: Theft 
In 1976, the theft of [13 paintings including the inventory cards](set/48648) from the collection of external property became known in Berlin (East). In the course of this, the monetary values were determined on the basis of comparable paintings and [new index cards](item/6105) were created. The employee Rößler, who worked for the East Berlin museums, had tried to transfer these works to West Berlin. He had succeeded in doing so in part. During another attempted border crossing, the artworks were confiscated by the GDR authorities in order to clarify ownership. In the period from **9 March to 25 May 1976**, the criminal investigation department returned the paintings to the museums.
### 1975-1976: Depot allocation
In the years **1975 and 1976**, storage work had been carried out in the East Berlin museums, including the revision of the fiduciary holdings in 1976. At the same time, a final storage space was allocated to the holdings of third-party property, i.e. the Lipperheide paintings: the depot in the basement of the *Bodemuseum*, where the Lipperheide paintings remained from **1976 until the move to the Kulturforum**.
### 1992/1993: Preparations for the relocation to Kulturforum (Matthäikirchplatz)
Prior to the institutes' move to the Kulturforum in 1992, the 151 miniatures and 23 bas-reliefs in the West Berlin library were also transferred to the Gemäldegalerie's external holdings. Conservation care by the Gemäldegalerie was also stipulated in the contract.
### 1996–1998: Reunification of the collections at Kulturforum (Matthäikirchplatz)
In preparation for the relocation of the Gemäldegalerie, the Print Room and the Kunstbibliothek to the Kulturforum, Rainer Michaelis, Christine Exler and Christina Ohlrogge carried out a review of the Lipperheide collection of paintings and miniatures in the *Bodemuseum* between **4 November 1996 and 14 February 1997**.[^In this context, technical and content-related information was added to the index cards, artworks were protected and conservation work carried out, paintings were labelled and rearranged. For the "Lipperheide Costume Collection", 315 numbers were recorded, one stolen portrait was noted and 164 numbers were listed, which had been taken over by the Berlin Kunstbibliothek in 1990.].  The first transfer from the *Bodemuseum* to the new building at the Kulturforum took place on **19 August 1997**, followed by others[^In a letter from Irene Geismeier to Bernd Evers dated 7 October 1998, the director informs us that the loans from the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek, which had a total of 485 items as of 1 October 1998, are now kept in a separate depot in the new building of the Gemäldegalerie at Stauffenbergstraße 40.].
### 2014: Transfer of miniatures et al. to the third-party depot
In **July 2014**, the administrative agreement between the Gemäldegalerie and the Kunstbibliothek, which has been in place since 16 November 1993, was extended by a further [81 objects](set/48649): miniatures and other works were transferred from the storage facility of the Lipperheidesche Kostümbibliothek to the Gemäldegalerie's administrative responsibility and into the depot of third-party property.

# Losses, deaccessions and write-offs in the course of the collection's history
The [donation documents](set/45249) show that in 1897 the painting collection consisted of 886 oil paintings, miniatures, wax paintings and reliefs. Today it still comprises 347 paintings, 231 miniatures and 28 relief sculptures. The collection, as the [collection chronology](jump to text about the chronology) shows, experienced a chequered history from its first presentation in 1905, through the confiscation of the building by the Gestapo in 1934 and its subsequent deposition. Losses, damage and incorrect collection contexts are a consequence of these circumstances. The documented or reconstructed cases are listed below:

A photographic image of the now lost [Portrait of a member of the Nuremberg Mülleg family](item/296) by an unknown hand, dated 1664, still exists and shows a lady in three-quarter profile in an interior. Also the [Portrait of a Woman in a Hoop Skirt and Medici Collar in an Interior](item/156) in the format 61 x 46 cm is considered lost.

Whether the missing pendant to the [Portrait of a seated woman in a dress with shawl collar](item/82) is a lost item cannot be determined with certainty. It is possible that the male counterpart was included in the sales lot of the Helbing auction house after the death of Franz von Lipperheide and sold at auction in 1909 or 1933. The pendant is documented by a [picture card or photograph from around 1900](media/38903) ([Q47](item/5813)) and shows a young man in Werther costume, sitting on a bench in front of a landscape. An inventory card has not survived. The inventory numbers 299 and 300 noted at the top right of the picture card also do not have a corresponding record in the travelling expense book.

The [inventory card](media/1771) from the West Berlin Kunstbibliothek for the [Portrait of a gentleman with a wig, holding a compass](item/181) describes the "Portrait of a corpulent, older man with a long wig, holding a compass in his right hand. At bottom left a detail of a map. Half-length portrait, turned slightly to the left from the front view. Anonymous. 18th century". The painting, executed in oil on wood, bears the inventory number 191, on the back the additional numbers 311, in blue chalk L. 216 and in ink 437. None of these numbers correspond with records in the travel expense book. The typed location " Librarian's room", presumably a reference to the premises in Jebensstraße, is supplemented by the note " Gemäldegalerie" and "Missing?".

In the case of the [Portrait of Veronica Fugger](item/445), too, only the West Berlin inventory card has survived, which describes the collection item as "Lady in Spanish costume with high ruff. Bust portrait, turned slightly to the right. The inscription "(V)E(RO)NICA FUGGERIN 1596" on a parapet at the bottom. The dimensions of the work, painted in oil on wood, are 28 x 21.5 cm; there was no frame. Here, too, there is a typewritten reference to the location ""Librarian's room", the note "GG" and "Missing?". The record in the travel book dated 15 November 1879, "1st portrait: Fuggerin", possibly refers to this work. The collectors purchased it from A. Rupprecht (Maxstrasse 32, Munich) for 220 marks.
The small oil sketch [Allegory of the Triumphant Italia - Italia trionfante](item/157) by Alessandro Franchi (1838-1914) shows the enthroned figure of "Italia", a fresco intended for the Palazzo Publico in Siena. The round oil sketch is accompanied by a typewritten inventory map and a black and white photograph. The oil painting was thus assigned to the Lipperheide collection at a certain point in time, but the work itself was considered lost. The Berlin Kunstbibliothek showed the work as part of the exhibition *From Schinkel to Mies van der Rohe: graphic designs by European architects, spatial and formal designers 1789-1969*. The reference to the provenance in the exhibition catalogue, the Leo Spik auction house in Berlin, where it was acquired on 19 September 1968, therefore rules out the possibility that it belongs to the Lipperheide collection. Instead, it should be assigned to the architecture collection of the Kunstbibliothek.

The large-format copperplate engraving ["Ploughing Farmer"](item/490) by William Strang from the second half of the 19th century was moved to the Kulturforum together with the Lipperheide painting collection in 1997. The inventory number L 299 refers to a Lipperheide collection context. Even before 1912, however, the engraving was integrated into the interior of the study room of the Kupferstichkabinett Berlin, more precisely in the western Kunstkammersaal, as a photograph of the time shows. The possibility of an early Lipperheide donation, analogous to other donations made to the Kupferstichkabinett, is certainly possible and could be verified through the cabinet's entry books.

The [Symphony of Flowers](item/216), executed in oil on limewood and measuring 55 x 85 cm, was photographed together with the von Lipperheide collection in the course of the inventory after the Second World War. The index card refers to the date of origin 1954 (with a question mark) and to Elisabeth Heinze née von Lieres as the work's author. There are also labels of the Reichsbahn-Spedition (Plauen/Vogtland GDR) on the back of the work. This work does not belong to the collection, its origin is unknown.

The two donor portraits of [Kaspar](item/569) and [Maria von Auerswalde](item/535) depict the donors almost in life-size on wood. The donor is identified by the inscription "Caspar von Auerswald, / Erbherr auf Auerswalde" and his age "AETATIS XXXXXX8". The female donor is also identified in the picture as: "Maria von Auerswald / née von Amsdorf". The inscription with the year 1566 probably refers to the event in the municipality of Auerswalde that was decisive for the foundation, as the copy of a letter from the local chronicler Ottwin Saupe to the descendants of the Dohnas states the dates 1585 for the donor's portrait and 1586 for the portrait of the donor. The author also reports that the two portraits, which had previously been attached to the upper porch of the manorial Auerswald chapel, were taken down, packed and sent to the Dohna descendants at Plauthen Castle in early September 1850. Johannes Voigt provided a further indication of the location in the church in 1824 in the " Contributions to the history of the von Auerswalde family" (Beiträgen zur Geschichte der Familie von Auerswalde): "They were both buried in the church of Auerswald, where their portraits were later also found." The provenance of the works can be deduced from the [label on the reverse](media/3586) on the donor's portrait. The inscription names the consignor and a date: "Sender: Heinrich Graf zu Dohna / v. (illegible) No. 1 / Berlin / (illegible) Nov. 32". The two donor portraits therefore only came into the possession of the museums in November 1932 and must not be attributed to the collection of Mr and Mrs von Lipperheide.

These two glass reverse paintings *Lovers* and *Older Lady with Two Cavaliers* with the L-numbers 259 and L260, recorded by Mr Kühlbach, an employee of the Costume Library, on an [inventory card](item/6088) bear the note: "destroyed, as completely broken" and underneath "still in Dahlem".

The portrait *Couple in Red*, a 18th century German piece, is also labelled with the location Dahlem and the inventory number L 247 and [bears the reference](item/6088) "destroyed, as completely broken", below "still in Dahlem".
