---
title: The Five Senses
date: "2024-12-14"
isPublic: true
color: "blueviolet"
description: "Like other cycles - for example the Four Continents or the Deadly Sins - the Five Senses became a popular allegorical subject in the 16th century, spreading mainly through Dutch prints. The five senses gustus, odoratus, visus, auditus and tactus are accompanied by animal symbols or attributes."
cover: "https://uclab.fh-potsdam.de/refa/files/large/3462bf943aaa761056dba91c89a90652c4833aaf.jpg"
---

# Allegory of the Five Senses
The sense *Visus* is accompanied by the animals eagle, lynx, cat or owl or the attributes telescope, magnifying glass, spectacles or [mirror](item/10538). The sense of hearing (Auditus) is accompanied by a boar, a mole or deer or a musical instrument, usually the lute. The sense of smell (Oderatus) has as companion either a vulture or dog or as an attribute a [flower](item/10300), usually the [carnation](item/45235). Taste (Gustus), as in this example *[The Taste](item/538)*, is accompanied by a [monkey](item/10475) or represented with fruits, a fruit basket or with [wine glass](item/10431). As fifth sense is considered to be the sense of touch (tactus), which is accompanied either by a spider, a turtle, a scorpion or a [bird](item/10587) with a symbolic content, such as a [ornamental bird](item/583) pecking into the hand, or by a harp.
 
The Five Senses Cycle by [Cornelis Cort](item/45189), based on designs by Frans Floris (1561), led the way in its dissemination. In it, he combined two concepts that were already common in the Middle Ages: Female personifications of the senses endowed with attributes (significant objects) are accompanied by symbolising sense-gifted animals [symbolising sense-gifted animals](item/10587). Such pictorial cycles or individual scenes, in each of which one sense is singled out and interpreted as a symbol, were particularly popular. Similarly, allegorical representations of the five senses were created from the end of the 16th century onwards. For example, after 1587 Adam van Noort created the drawings for two [engravings](item/42994) in which the Five Senses are united on one sheet [^Allegory of the Five Senses, Adam van Noort (designer), Adriane Collaert (engraver), 1570-1618, copper engraving, 22 x 27.1 cm, Rijksmuseum (Amsterdam)]. In the engraving executed by [Adriane Collaert](item/42994) a new realistic conception of the subject can be discerned, with which the change from the original allegory to a bourgeois social image begins. Abraham Govaerts and Ambrosius Francken II (?) placed the [Allegory of the Five Senses](item/45736) from 1624 in a landscape setting.[^Landscape with the Allegory of the Five Senses, Abraham Govaerts, Ambrosius Francken II (?), 1624, Kunstpalast, Düsseldorf, Inv.-No. M 38]

The diversity of allegorical representations of the five senses, especially in Flemish and Dutch painting in the 17th century, produced large-scale allegories and small cabinet paintings. Cornelis de Vos, Adriaen van Ostade, Jan Miense Molenaer, Barent Fabritius, Ambrosius Francken the Younger and Herman van Aldewereld created such pictorial cycles.[^Cf. Five Senses in Painting 2016]
French still life painting of the 1620s and 1630s also integrated the theme of the Five Senses. Furthermore, the biblical story of the Prodigal Son was interwoven with that of the Five Senses from the end of the 16th century, especially in the Netherlands. Scenes in inns with people playing music, drinking and smoking illustrate this. Painters such as Simon de Vos and David Teniers the Younger spread this pictorial theme. Another group of representations are the already mentioned narrative representations in the form of genre scenes: Until the 19th century, this type of painting, represented by artists such as Philip van Dijk, Luca Giordano, Gerard de Lairesse, Jacob Duck or Michiel Sweerts, was popular.
In the painting from the Lipperheide Collection, the representation of the Five Senses was combined with a family portrait.

## Portrait of the Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg as Allegory of the Five Senses
The small-format painting in landscape format shows  [three women ](media/45744) and [two men](media/1631) standing in a landscape as an allegory of the five senses. The figures are standing on a narrow grassy hill, in the foreground, the three ladies on the left and two gentlemen on the right. The lady at the left edge of the picture is playing a mandolin. Next to her, facing the first lady, are the other two ladies. One of them holds a mirror in her right hand, the other one lifts her upper garment slightly and is pecked in the finger by a green parrot sitting on her hand. Separated by a narrow path that meanders into the depths parallel to a river, the two gentlemen stand under the tree on the right. While the former, his back turned to the ladies, reaches into the tree for a red fruit with his left hand, the one standing next to him brings a blossom to his face with his right.

### Deduction
The reference in the [archive](media/1602) to this painting, originally called *Five Senses*, with anonymous authorship, is to another portrait in the Lipperheide collection under the heading Notes: The [painting](item/607), originally identified by means of the [archive](media/3777) as a *Junger Mann in einem Schoßwams* by an anonymous artist, shows a young nobleman who bears an optical resemblance to one of the gentlemen from the picture of the *Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg as an Allegory of the Five Senses*. By means of the numbers and letters "1.6.4.7 Henry Fridezic Comte de Holax s [Fridezic alternatively Frideric; Holax alternatively Holar or Holac; free-standing s diagonally crossed out]", which is visible in this [photograph](media/3776), a search could be made for the sitter. The sitter is therefore Heinrich Friedrich zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg (1624-1699) [^Cf. on the brothers Joachim Albrecht and Heinrich Friedrich Hohenlohe 1995, pp. 17-24, esp. pp. 22-24]. Derived from other small-format paintings in the possession of the Hohenlohe family, it was thus possible to establish not only the identity of the young man in the single portrait, but also the identity of the five siblings in the Allergy of the Five Senses. Furthermore, a comparison of the material support of the single portrait and the [family portrait](media/1560), here irradiated with ultraviolet light for better visualisation, allowed the conclusion that the two works from the Lipperheide collection were created by the same artist. It is the court painter [Joachim Georg Creuzfelder](item/9350).  

### Attributes
he present *[Picture of the Five Children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg as Allegory of the Five Senses](item/159)* thus shows the five children of Count Philipp Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg. From left to right are to be seen: ["Eva Christina"](item/9390) as ["Auditus"](item/10613) (Hearing) with a lute, Anna Magdalena as [Visus](item/10536) (Seeing) with a [Mirror](item/10946), Maria Juliana as [Tactus](item/10586) (Feeling) with a bird pecking her hand, Joachim Albrecht as [Gustus](item/10913) (Tasting) with an apple and [Heinrich Friedrich](item/607) as Odoratus (Smelling) with a flower. Thus this is a sibling portrait combined with an allegory of the five senses. This is unique in the oeuvre of the painter Joachim Georg Creuzfelder. In this portrait of siblings, the young Hohenlohe court painter combines the common iconographic sign inventory of the allegory of the Five Senses with a family portrait. Creuzfelder chose a simple assignment of five sense attributes to one portrait each, in which no biographically based assignment pattern can be read.

Another example of this blend of genres is given here: in 1637, at another German court, the sibling portrait of the [Children of Duke Augustus the Younger of Brunswick-Lüneburg](item/43003). The children are shown in an inside room, the open window provides a view of the Braunschweig Burgplatz with the Braunschweig Lion and the so-called "Mosthaus". From left to right are: Rudolf August (1627-1704) as Auditus at the piano, Ferdinand Albrecht (1636-1687) as Tactus with a parrot, Sibylla Ursula (1629-1671) as Visus with a mirror in her hand, Anton Ulrich (1633-1714) as Gustus with the attributes of fruit basket, wine glass and little monkey, and Clara Augusta (1632-1700) as Odoratus, holding flowers in her hand and a dog. In contrast to the Hohenlohe painting, the iconography of the allegorical representation is more complex and more than one attribute accompanies the children.

### Fashionable attributes in the sibling portrait
The [males](media/1628) in the depiction are dressed in a wide-flared, sleeveless leather collar. The breeches are worn wide and are decorated with gold-coloured elements on the side trouser leg. The wide-legged cup or gauntlet boots fall in soft creases, and spurs are attached to the bootstrap. The toes of the boots are angularly shaped. The ensemble is completed by the decorative accessories of braudiers and buckles. The hair falls open and curly over a turn-down collar made of lace. The headgear consists of a felt or woollen hat (beaver fur?) with a high stiff headpiece and a narrow brim. Around the hat is a gold-coloured corded string. They hold their headdresses in their hands, which they rest on their hips. 
The three ladies depicted wear floor-length dresses of richly and fully embroidered textile, moderately puffed by petticoats. The club-shaped sleeves consist of a half-length sleeve and a long sleeve and fall stiffly. The waists are pushed upwards and the snip toes are moderately low. The décolletés are framed by flat, wide lace collars. The sitter's hair is tied in a knot, also called a chignon, above the ears and covered by a small bonnet. This hairstyle is accompanied by earrings in the form of single large pearls.

The present painting falls into the transitional period between the early Baroque, also marked by the time of the 30 Years War (1614-1648), and the High Baroque. Whereas during the Renaissance fashions still varied greatly from region to region, from 1630 onwards an increasingly large part of Europe was covered by a uniform style of hairstyle and dress. The Thirty Years' War separated the two great courtly fashions, the stiff Spanish fashion from the playful French fashion of the late Baroque under the fashion supremacy of King Louis XIV.

During the 30 Years' War, men's fashion is strongly influenced by military clothing, which in turn was composed of the elements of peasant costume and had been adapted to the needs of the wearer. The basic elements consisted of a felt hat, a soft overskirt, the leather collar over the doublet, the bandelier, a leather strap laid over the shoulder that held the rapier or sword, as well as comfortable breeches and cup boots, also called gauntlet boots. The man's decorative accessories were the hat, lace-trimmed sleeve cuffs, the lace collar and the adornment of the cup boots with lace, as well as the braudier, metal fasteners and buckles and spurs.

At the courts of France and England at the time of the Thirty Years' War, the ideal of the cavalier emerged in the so-called cavalier fashion, which was supposed to be characterised above all by courtly and gallant behaviour. The appearance is characterised by about calf-length, moderately wide-cut tube trousers, which replaced the tight-fitting leg warmers. The breeches were either tied or worn straight, at knee height and at the outer seams the textile was often decorated with metal threads or with nestels, later, at the time of the Rhine count's dress, with ribbon jewellery or rosettes. The legwear was supplemented by wide cup boots, which were sometimes filled out with lace. The front cap was no longer round but angular. 
The leather collar as a military garment had also found its way into the civilian context, its lap parts overlapping and taking up the wearer's movements as he stepped out.  The broad-brimmed hat worn with it, often adorned with an ostrich feather, and the wide cup boots reinforced the wearer's striding out by swinging the textiles. This was acoustically underpinned by the metal accessories such as baudrier and spurs, which had also found their way into the civilian context. Curly hair and a cavalier's beard were further hallmarks of the cavalier.
The attributes of cavalier dress were not only adopted, especially by the fashionable bourgeois, but were carried on to fashionable foppery. It was in this context that the term "monsieur à la mode" or "à la mode cavalier" was first used in Germany and France.

In women's clothing, the hoop skirt has been replaced and the now less extreme widening of the hips is achieved by hip pads and by puffy petticoats. The wide, pleated skirt is usually overlong and gathered as one walks. In the front, a deep, stiffened snood descends into the lap. By bending slightly forward, it accentuated the midriff and the high waistline. 
The sleeves were puffy wide to club-shaped and puffed. After 1640, the sleeves became ¾ length and slightly tighter. The stiffened Spanish ruff was now replaced by a soft, rounded shoulder and a rounded neckline collar falling over the shoulder. The trend towards a softly falling collar can be observed in women's fashion just as in men's fashion around 1630.

In women's fashion, a simple hairstyle replaced the high Spanish women's wigs around 1620. The hair is now tightly tied from the forehead and over the ears with the hair at the nape of the neck to form a strong chignon, an elaborate interweaving in the form of a pinned-up knot. The twisted braids, sometimes supported by netting, sit high on the back of the head and are framed by strings of pearls. This hairstyle is very often accompanied by earrings in the form of single large pearls. Later, around 1640, more freedom was given to fringe and side curls; especially in women's fashion, this harmonised with the soft drape of the dresses. In contrast to the bourgeois women, whose hairstyle required a bonnet, aristocratic ladies were allowed to display their artfully drawn curls openly.
